Try and experiment with me for the next five seconds.
Don't think about breathing.
five, four, three, two, one.
It's hard, right?
Because in truth, we don't think about breathing.
We just do it.
But when we're stressed, our quick shallow breath signal
to the brain, that is time to run.
That's great if we're facing a tiger, but not so great.
When we're prepping for an important board meeting
or when we go through long periods of stress
luckily we can override that fight
or flight message to the brain with breath work.
Conscious breathing exercises or techniques designed
to short circuit the stress response
and help us focus or relax.
Let's learn three breathing exercises that are easy to work
into a busy day
and offer benefits right away, including enhanced focus
lower anxiety, and deep relaxation.
We'll start with belly breathing
which is perfect for beginners, to do it.
Lie down on your back or sit in a comfortable position.
Place one hand on your belly
and the other hand on your chest.
Take a deep breath through the nose
and feel your belly expand
as the lungs push the diaphragm down.
Most of the movement should be in your belly
not the chest and shoulders.
Now exhale through your mouth, through pursed lips.
You'll feel the hand on your belly move.
You can even apply gentle pressure to release the last
of the air.
Belly breathing works because it encourages us to
slowly fill our lungs to capacity
which tells the body we're ready to relax.
You can repeat the breath cycle
for several minutes to achieve a deeper state of calm.
Next is 4-7-8 breathing,
your secret weapon to get
to sleep or reduce anxiety.
First, blow all the air out from your lungs.
Then inhale through the nose while you count to four.
Internally, count to seven
in your head while holding your breath.
Then exhale for a count of eight.
Repeat the pattern three or more times.
A note of caution, 4-7-8 breathing and other techniques
should not be practiced
while operating machinery or driving.
Breath work may make you feel dizzy or lightheaded.
If you don't feel well during or after breath, work
stop and seek medical attention.
Likewise, if you have any health conditions
you should ask your doctor before starting with breath work.
The third method box breathing is reportedly used
by Navy Seals to help them achieve clarity and focus.
Start by exhaling to empty the lungs.
Then follow a pattern of four counts to inhale.
Four, holding the breath and four counts to exhale
repeat for up to several minutes.
Breath work isn't a miracle cure
but it has been shown to help
with various medical conditions from mental health
and blood pressure to chronic pain and asthma.
And anyone can do elementary breath work to
calm the nervous system and decrease stress and anxiety.
So before pressure mounts, consider getting
into a regular practice using one
of the techniques you've learned today.
Belly breathing, 4-7-8 breathing or box breathing.
That way the next time you are stressed, you can turn
fight or flight into calm, cool,
and collected with breath work.